#81: Updated user guide (#82)
exasol/spark-exasol-connector: doc/user_guide/user_guide.md

spark-submit \
  --master spark://spark-master-url:7077 \
  --repositories https://maven.exasol.com/artifactory/exasol-releases \
  --packages com.exasol:spark-connector_2.11:<VERSION> \
  --class com.organization.SparkApplication \
  path/to/spark_application.jar
```

The `--repositories` and `--packages` can be omitted if your Spark application
JAR already includes the connector as a dependency (e.g, jar-with-dependencies).

Like `spark-shell` and `spark-submit`, you can also use `pyspark` and `sparkR`
commands.

### Spark Exasol Connector as JAR Dependency

You can also build an assembled jar from the source. This way, you use the
latest commits that may not be released yet.

Clone the repository:

```sh
git clone https://github.com/exasol/spark-exasol-connector

cd spark-exasol-connector/
```

To create an assembled jar file, run the command:

```sh
./sbtx assembly
```

The assembled jar file should be located at
`target/scala-2.12/spark-exasol-connector-assembly-<VERSION>.jar`.

Then you can use this jar file with `spark-submit`, `spark-shell` or `pyspark`
commands.

```shell
spark-shell --jars /path/to/spark-exasol-connector-assembly-*.jar
```

## Configuration Options

> In this section, we describe configuration parameters that are used to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this section, we describe the configuration parameters that are used to
```

facilitate the integration between Spark and Exasol clusters.

List of required and optional parameters:

| Spark Configuration           | Configuration    | Default       | Description
| :---                          | :---             | :---          | :---
|                               | ``query``        | *<none>*      | An Exasol SQL query string to send to Exasol cluster
|                               | ``table``        | *<none>*      | A table name (with schema, e.g. schema.table) to save dataframe into
| ``spark.exasol.host``         | ``host``         | ``10.0.0.11`` | A host ip address to the **first** Exasol node
| ``spark.exasol.port``         | ``port``         | ``8563``      | A JDBC port number to connect to Exasol database
| ``spark.exasol.username``     | ``username``     | ``sys``       | An username for connecting to the Exasol database

> | ``spark.exasol.password``     | ``password``     | ``exasol``    | An password for connecting to the Exasol database

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| ``spark.exasol.password``     | ``password``     | ``exasol``    | A password for connecting to the Exasol database
```

| ``spark.exasol.max_nodes``    | ``max_nodes``    | ``200``       | The number of data nodes in the Exasol cluster

> | ``spark.exasol.batch_size``   | ``batch_size``   | ``1000``      | The number of records batched before running execute statement when saving dataframe

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| ``spark.exasol.batch_size``   | ``batch_size``   | ``1000``      | The number of records batched before running an execute statement when saving dataframe
```

> | ``spark.exasol.create_table`` | ``create_table`` | ``false``     | A permission to create a table if it does not exist in Exasol database when saving dataframe

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| ``spark.exasol.create_table`` | ``create_table`` | ``false``     | A permission to create a table if it does not exist in the Exasol database when saving dataframe
```

> | ``spark.exasol.drop_table``   | ``drop_table``   | ``false``     | A permission to drop the table if it exists in Exasol database when saving dataframe

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| ``spark.exasol.drop_table``   | ``drop_table``   | ``false``     | A permission to drop the table if it exists in the Exasol database when saving dataframe
```

| ``spark.exasol.jdbc_options`` | ``jdbc_options`` | ``""``        | A string to specify the list of Exasol JDBC options using ``key1=value1;key2=value2`` format

### Max Nodes

Setting the `max_nodes` value to a large number does not increase the connector

> parallelism. The number of parallel connections will always be limited to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
parallelism. The number of parallel connections is always limited to the
```

number of Exasol data nodes.

However, you can use this configuration to decrease the parallelism. This can be
helpful when debugging an issue. For example, you can set it to one and check if
the behavior changes.

### JDBC Options

The Spark Exasol Connector uses Exasol JDBC Driver to connect to the Exasol

> cluster from Spark cluster. You can use this configuration parameter to enrich

Reviewer: ```suggestion
cluster from the Spark cluster. You can use this configuration parameter to enrich
```

the JDBC connection.

> For example, to enable debugging with log directory:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, to enable debugging with a log directory:
```

```
.option("jdbc_options", "debug=1;logdir=/tmp/")
```

> Please make sure that it does not start or end with a semicolon (`;`).

Reviewer: Is it about the directory name?

Author: No, it is about the whole options.
Does this better?
```suggestion
Please make sure that the `jdbc_options` string value does not start or end with a semicolon (`;`).
```

For more JDBC options please check the [Exasol JDBC documentation][exasol-jdbc].

### Providing Configuration Settings in DataFrame Load or Save

> Provide the configuration options when creating a dataframe from an Exasol

Reviewer: Is it mandatory? Please add a short description of why we need to provide them

Author: Added.

query.

```scala
val exasolDF = sparkSession
  .read
  .format("exasol")
  .option("host", "10.0.0.11")
  .option("port", "8563")
  .option("username", "<USERNAME>")
  .option("password", "<PASSWORD>")
  .option("query", "<EXASOLQUERY_STRING>")
  .load()
```

Similarly, you can set these configurations when saving a dataframe to an Exasol
table.

### Providing Configuration Settings in SparkConf

You can set the configurations in the
[SparkConf](https://spark.apache.org/docs/latest/api/java/org/apache/spark/SparkConf.html)
object using the `spark.exasol.` prefix.

```scala
// Create a configuration object
val sparkConf = new SparkConf()
  .setMaster("local[*]")
  .set("spark.exasol.host", "10.0.0.11")
  .set("spark.exasol.port", "8563")
  .set("spark.exasol.username", "sys")
  .set("spark.exasol.password", "exasol")

// Provide it to the SparkSession
val sparkSession = SparkSession
  .builder()
  .config(sparkConf)
  .getOrCreate()
```

This way you can use the SparkSession with pre-configured settings when reading

> or saving a dataframe from Exasol database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
or saving a dataframe from the Exasol database.
```

Please note that configuration values set on SparkConf have higher precedence.

> ### Providing Configuration Settings With spark-submit

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Providing Configuration Settings With `spark-submit`
```

Like SparkConf, you can configure the Exasol key-value settings from outside.
For example, at the startup using `--conf key=value` syntax.

Provide configurations with `spark-submit`:

```sh
spark-submit \
    --master spark://spark-master-url:7077
    ...
    --conf spark.exasol.username=sys \
    --conf spark.exasol.password=exaTru3P@ss \
    path/to/spark_application.jar
```

This allows you to avoid hardcoding the credentials in your Spark applications.

> Providing configurations parameters with `spark-submit` has higher precedence

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Providing configurations parameters with `spark-submit` has a higher precedence
```

than the SparkConf configurations.

## Creating a Spark DataFrame From Exasol Query

You can query the Exasol database and load the results of the query into a Spark
dataframe. 

> Specify the data source format as `"exasol"` and provide the required

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For that specify the data source format as `"exasol"` and provide the required
```

configurations.

> As an example we query two retail tables from Exasol database:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As an example we query two retail tables from the Exasol database:
```

```scala
val exasolQueryString = """
  SELECT s.SALES_DATE, s.MARKET_ID, sp.ARTICLE_ID, sp.AMOUNT
  FROM RETAIL.SALES s
  JOIN RETAIL.SALES_POSITIONS sp
  ON s.SALES_ID != sp.SALES_ID
  WHERE s.MARKET_ID IN (534, 678, 1019, 2277)
"""
```

Please combine your Exasol queries into a single query string and load the
result into the Spark DataFrame. This helps to reduce the additional network
overhead. At the moment, it is not possible to create many dataframes with
several separate queries.

Create a dataframe from the query result:

```scala
val df = sparkSession
  .read
  .format("exasol")
  .option("host", "10.0.0.11")
  .option("port", "8563")
  .option("username", "<USERNAME>")
  .option("password", "<PASSWORD>")
  .option("query", exasolQueryString)
  .load()
```

Now you can inspect the schema of the dataframe:

```scala
df.printSchema()
```

If you are only interested in some columns, you can select them:

```scala
df.select("MARKET_ID", "AMOUNT")
```

> Run other Spark related data analytics, run transformations and aggregations on

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Run other Spark related data analytics, run transformations and aggregations on the
```

dataframe:

```scala
val transformedDF = df
  .filter($"MARKET_ID".isin(534, 678, 1019, 2277))

val groupedDF = transformedDF
  .groupBy("SALES_DATE")
  .agg(sum("AMOUNT"), countDistinct("ARTICLE_ID").alias("ARTICLE_CNT"))
  .sort($"SALES_DATE".desc)
```

## Saving Spark DataFrame to an Exasol Table

You can also save the Spark dataframe into an Exasol table:

```scala
groupedDF
  .write
  .mode("overwrite")
  .format("exasol")
  .option("host", "10.0.0.11")
  .option("port", "8563")
  .option("username", "<USERNAME>")
  .option("password", "<PASSWORD>")
  .option("create_table", "true")
  .option("table", "<schema>.<table>")
  .save()
```

Please notice that we create the table if it is not already available in the
Exasol database.

### Spark Save Modes

When saving a dataframe, you can provide two optional parameters: `drop_table`
and `create_table`.

If you set the `drop_table` configuration to `true`, then just before saving the
Spark dataframe, the connector drops the Exasol table if it exists.

If you set the `create_table` configuration to `true`, the connector will

> eagerly try to create an Exasol table from Spark dataframe schema before saving

Reviewer: ```suggestion
eagerly try to create an Exasol table from a Spark dataframe schema before saving
```

the contents of the dataframe.

Depending on your use case, you can provide both of these parameters at the same
time.

Additionally, a Spark save operation takes optional `SaveMode` configurations.

| Spark Save Mode     | Description
| :---                | :---

> | `"error"` (default) | If the table exists an exception is thrown. You could drop the table via connector `drop_table` option.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `"error"` (default) | If the table exists an exception is thrown. You could drop the table via the connector `drop_table` option.
```

> | `"append"`          | If the table exists, the contents of dataframe are appended to the existing table.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `"append"`          | If the table exists, the contents of the dataframe are appended to the existing table.
```

> | `"overwrite"`       | If the table exists, it is truncated first and then the contents of dataframe saved to the table.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `"overwrite"`       | If the table exists, it is truncated first and then the contents of the dataframe are saved to the table.
```

| `"ignore"`          | If the table exists, the save operation is skipped, and nothing is changed in the existing table.

> Please keep in mind that Spark Save Modes does not use any locking mechanisms,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Please keep in mind that Spark Save Modes do not use any locking mechanisms,
```

thus they are not atomic. 

## Troubleshooting

> In this section, we provide common issues and pitfalls when using Spark Exasol

Reviewer: I hope we don't provide them :)))

> In this section, we provide common issues and pitfalls when using Spark Exasol

Author: I hope not :)) Thanks for fixing it!

> Connector and instructions on how to solve them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Connector and provide instructions on how to solve them.
```

### Exasol JDBC Sub Connections

The Spark Exasol connector uses [Exasol JDBC Sub
Connections][jdbc-subconnections] underneath. The sub-connections are static by
design. You can use them after all the connections have been established.

[jdbc-subconnections]: https://community.exasol.com/t5/database-features/parallel-connections-with-jdbc/ta-p/1779

However, this causes problems in certain situations since Spark tasks are very
dynamic. Depending on the available Spark cluster resource, tasks can be
scheduled dynamically, not all at once.

In these cases, not all of the sub-connections will be consumed, and the
connector will throw an exception.

> A similar issue occurs when the number of parallel connections (the number

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A similar issue occurs when the number of parallel connections (the number of
```

Exasol data nodes) is more than the Spark tasks. This can happen when the Spark
cluster does not have enough resources to schedule parallel tasks.

For instance, an Exasol cluster has three data nodes, and a Spark cluster has
only two (virtual) CPUs. In this case, the Spark cluster can only schedule two
tasks at a time. In such situations, you can decrease the JDBC sub-connections
by setting `max_nodes` parameters to a lower number.

To resolve these issues we are waiting for the [Spark Barrier Execution
Mode](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/SPARK-24374).

> ### Spark DataFrame Show

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Spark DataFrame `.show()` Action
```

> Spark dataframe `.show()` action is one of the operations that fail because of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The spark dataframe `.show()` action is one of the operations that fails because of
```

the problems described in the previous section.

> Instead, we recommend using the `collect()` operation with combination SQL
> `LIMIT` clause.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We recommend using the `collect()` operation with combination SQL
`LIMIT` clause instead.
```

[error]         at com.exasol.jdbc.AbstractEXAConnection.reconnect(AbstractEXAConnection.java:3505)
[error]         at com.exasol.jdbc.ServerCommunication.handle(ServerCommunication.java:98)
[error]         at com.exasol.jdbc.AbstractEXAConnection.communication(AbstractEXAConnection.java:2537)
[error]         at com.exasol.jdbc.AbstractEXAConnection.communication_resultset(AbstractEXAConnection.java:2257)
[error]         at com.exasol.jdbc.AbstractEXAStatement.execute(AbstractEXAStatement.java:456)
[error]         at com.exasol.jdbc.EXAStatement.execute(EXAStatement.java:278)
[error]         at com.exasol.jdbc.AbstractEXAStatement.executeQuery(AbstractEXAStatement.java:601)
[error]         at com.exasol.spark.rdd.ExasolRDD.compute(ExasolRDD.scala:125)
[error]         at org.apache.spark.rdd.RDD.computeOrReadCheckpoint(RDD.scala:324)
[error]         at org.apache.spark.rdd.RDD.iterator(RDD.scala:288)
```

It can be mitigated by submitting a Spark application with enough resources so
that it can start parallel tasks that are more or equal to the number of
parallel Exasol connections.

> Additionally, you can limit the Exasol parallel connections using `max_nodes`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, you can limit the Exasol parallel connections using the `max_nodes`
```
